# The advent of data-driven psychology and its use through agent-based modeling to accurately describe social networks

Data science is ushering a revolution to many fields of science. Utilizing agent-based modeling, simulations are created that can describe natural phenomena including economic and social systems. I propose that the effects of data science on the field of psychology, specially the push to analyzing and predicting human behavior and condition through Big Data, will yield more sophisticated and accurate agent-based models. This newfound accuracy, when used correctly will better society through better planning of buildings or transportation, basically any fields that include human interactions and most importantly human choices. Unfortunately, like many tools, if put into the wrong hands these models can be used to degrade privacy or personal choice, such as seen with surveillance capitalism. 
	
  Human psychology is immensely complex. When a person makes a choice, many variables are considered. The goal of certain agent-based models is to accurately portray the decision and outcomes of these presented choices. Before Big Data, surveys and personal observations were necessary to gather data. Now, data is collected seemingly everywhere. Numerous variables are collected across oodles of observations. The interpretations of the outcome of human choice may no longer be relegated solely to a psychologist with a few observations. Machine learning can identify patterns in the data to determine which variables influence specific choices, including how strong these patterns or correlations are. Data mining allows this analysis to happen by searching through these patterns and using different methods of analysis to describe the results. With predicative modeling, these groups are pre identified and the model will examine what makes this group distinct from others. This pattern can be used to attribute more accurate behaviors to agents within a model to predict how members of certain groups would act.
	
  On the surface, it is easy to see that every individual is unique. There are so many differences between all our choices and actions, so many dimensions to our psyche. Data science now allows us to not only gather copious amounts of information to capture all these dimensions, but also to analyze it. Comparing numerous facets of our lives can elucidate a pattern to our decisions, but only through dimensionality reduction. Without boiling down the numerous variables that we produce, we will not see general trends. Through the mining of data to the analysis of patterns clearly distinguished through dimensionality reduction, more realistic agents can be produced within models. At the very least, more variables can be used within the model through the utilization of Big Data. 
	
  This newly powerful form of agent- based modeling would benefit many sectors of work. For instance, in transportation, more effective modeling of driving behavior can inform engineers of what road designs will work best for traffic flows. These models can also account for different driving habits of certain areas, such as the ridiculous drivers in New Jersey or the speedy drivers in the open west. At a slower pace, this more effective modeling can be used to better describe agent movement through a building. If we focus on the example of a grocery store, where can merchandise be placed to garner the most attention, but without impeding the flow of customers? This model would have to account for the probability of agents shifting their attention to the product and how they would act once they are examining it. However, large corporations can use these models for nefarious purposes, such as surveillance capitalism.
	
  What if agent-based models and predictions are too accurate? Personal privacy and choice intersect with utilizing predictions of these models. For example, in 2012 Target made national headlines for being caught predicting the pregnancy of its customers. These shoppers were identified through data mining of the products bought to identify which were frequently bought by pregnant women. This model could even predict how far along the shoppers were. Through agent-based modeling, the simulation of behavior could contribute to the subtle control of behavior by companies. Humans cannot be reduced down to drones following the same path that the agents did in order to maximize product. The problem here is not the agent-based models themselves, but the decisions made based on their outcome. The more accurate the model, the more informed and effective the decision.
	
  Data driven psychology has the potential to revolutionize agent-based modeling. Through the deep analysis of many variables with data mining and dimensionality reduction, numerous patterns can be distinguished and then modeled. These models can be used for good to optimize floor plans for buildings or transportation plans for cities, but they can also be used for bad. Subtle controlling of individuals and intrusions of privacy from models so accurate, they can predict your choices. This prediction can be dangerous is the hands of some, but in the end these models will benefit humanity. 
